doc/source/Development_Environment_Setup_VM.rst, before:

Setup the VM
============

Here we describe how the VM image provided by the auto-build may be used for
development and offline usage (i.e. at events).

Prerequisites
-------------

To run the image you need the Qemu/KVM or VirtualBox software for
virtualization. Furthermore some software is recommended for working with
the running image: ssh for shell access and sshfs for mounting the
repository in the VM into your local file system.

Download
--------

The VM-images can be downloaded from `the CdE server
<https://ssl.cde-ev.de/cdedb2/images/>`_. The access credentials can be
found on `the tracker
<https://tracker.cde-ev.de/gitea/cdedb/cdedb2/wiki/Home>`_.

Running
-------

If ``cdedb.qcow2`` is the downloaded image, then the VM can be started with
QEMU via the following command (note that the name of the binary may differ
from ``kvm``)::

  kvm -m 1G -enable-kvm -device virtio-rng-pci -net nic,model=virtio -net user,hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:20022-:22,hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:20443-:443,hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:5000-:5000 -drive file=cdedb.qcow2,if=virtio,cache=writethrough

If ``cdedb.vdi`` is the downloaded image, then the VM can be run with
VirtualBox via the GUI. Thereby, choose the unpacked ``cdedb.vi`` image as hard
disk. Furthermore, you would like to set some port forwarding (which is included
in the kvm command).

If you dont know how to do this, take a look at the first point in
:ref:`accessing-vm-windows`. Note that there are two existing port forwarding, one
for ``20022`` and one for ``20443``.

Accessing -- Linux
------------------

Once the VM is up and running you can access it in the following ways. The
password for the ``cdedb`` user (used for access via ssh etc.) is
``akademie``.

* web: Open https://localhost:20443/ in a browser of your choice.
* ssh::

    ssh -p 20022 cdedb@localhost

* scp (note that there are two possible directions)::

    scp -P 20022 /path/to/source cdedb@localhost:/path/to/destination
    scp -P 20022 cdedb@localhost:/path/to/source /path/to/destination

* sshfs (this is probably the most comfortable option for development,
  and only necessary for development not for usage during an event)::

    sshfs cdedb@localhost:/cdedb2/ /path/to/mountpoint/ -p 20022

For ease of use it may be advisable to put these commands into script
files. Additionally it helps to put your ssh public key into the (new)
file ``/home/cdedb2/.ssh/authorized_keys`` to suppress password queries.

.. _accessing-vm-windows:

Accessing -- Windows
--------------------

Das Ansprechen der VM ist unter Windows etwas komplizierter als unter Linux.
Im Folgenden werden die Arbeitsschritte einmal für VirtualBox durchgegangen.
Das Passwort für den Nutzer ``cdedb`` der VM ist ``akademie``.

* Web: Im VirtualBox Manager, bearbeite die VM

    * Netzwerkadapter / Adapter1: Angeschlossen an ``NAT``
    * Erweitert / Port-Weiterleitung: Neue Regel::

        Protokoll:TCP, Host-ID:127.0.0.1, Host-Port:20443, Gast-Port:223

  Jetzt lässt sich die VM unter https://localhost:20443/ im Browser ansprechen.

* ssh

    * VirtualBox Manager / Datei / Host-only Netzwerk-Manager / Erzeuge::

        NAME, IPv4:192.168.56.1/24, DHCP-Server:enable

    * Im VirtualBox Manager, bearbeite die VM / Netzwerkadapter / Adapter 2::

        Angeschlossen an:Hostonly-Adapter, Name:NAME

    * Starte die VM, melde dich an

        * ``id a`` sollte einen Eintrag ``enp0s8`` oder ähnlich zeigen, der leer ist::

            sudo nano /etc/network/interfaces

        * Am Ende der Datei hinzufügen::

            auto enp0s8
            iface enp0s8 inet static
            address 192.168.56.10
            netmask 255.255.255.0

  Jetzt sollte die VM über die CMD erreichbar sein::

    ssh.exe cdedb@192.168.56.10

* mounten: Dies ist nur für die aktive Entwicklung relevant, nicht für die Offline-VM.
  Hierfür gibt es keine Windows eigene Lösung. So funktionierts trotzdem

    * Führe die Schritte unter ``ssh`` aus.
    * Installiere https://github.com/billziss-gh/sshfs-win -- mindestens
      ``SSHFS-Win 3.5 BETA``
    * Navigiere zum Desktop im Explorer / Rechtsklick ``Dieser Pc`` / Netzlaufwerk verbinden... ::

        \\sshfs.r\cdedb@192.168.56.10\cdedb2

  Nun sollte die VM als Netzlaufwerk eingehängt worden sein.

Commit message:

doc: Add hint about multi-core use of qcow2 VMs

doc/source/Development_Environment_Setup_VM.rst, after:

Setup the VM
============

Here we describe how the VM image provided by the auto-build may be used for
development and offline usage (i.e. at events).

Prerequisites
-------------

To run the image you need the Qemu/KVM or VirtualBox software for
virtualization. Furthermore some software is recommended for working with
the running image: ssh for shell access and sshfs for mounting the
repository in the VM into your local file system.

Download
--------

The VM-images can be downloaded from `the CdE server
<https://ssl.cde-ev.de/cdedb2/images/>`_. The access credentials can be
found on `the tracker
<https://tracker.cde-ev.de/gitea/cdedb/cdedb2/wiki/Home>`_.

Running
-------

If ``cdedb.qcow2`` is the downloaded image, then the VM can be started with
QEMU via the following command (note that the name of the binary may differ
from ``kvm``)::

  kvm -m 1G -enable-kvm -device virtio-rng-pci -net nic,model=virtio -net user,hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:20022-:22,hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:20443-:443,hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:5000-:5000 -drive file=cdedb.qcow2,if=virtio,cache=writethrough

By default, the VM uses a single core only, which may limit performance
especially in parallel to lint and integration tests. To mitigate these
constraints, you may use ``-smp n`` as parameter to allow the VM to use ``n``
cores of your system.

If ``cdedb.vdi`` is the downloaded image, then the VM can be run with
VirtualBox via the GUI. Thereby, choose the unpacked ``cdedb.vi`` image as hard
disk. Furthermore, you would like to set some port forwarding (which is included
in the kvm command).

If you dont know how to do this, take a look at the first point in
:ref:`accessing-vm-windows`. Note that there are multiple port forwardings,
for ``20022``, ``20443`` and ``5000``.

Accessing -- Linux
------------------

Once the VM is up and running you can access it in the following ways. The
password for the ``cdedb`` user (used for access via ssh etc.) is
``akademie``.

* web: Open https://localhost:20443/ in a browser of your choice.
* ssh::

    ssh -p 20022 cdedb@localhost

* scp (note that there are two possible directions)::

    scp -P 20022 /path/to/source cdedb@localhost:/path/to/destination
    scp -P 20022 cdedb@localhost:/path/to/source /path/to/destination

* sshfs (this is probably the most comfortable option for development,
  and only necessary for development not for usage during an event)::

    sshfs cdedb@localhost:/cdedb2/ /path/to/mountpoint/ -p 20022

For ease of use it may be advisable to put these commands into script
files. Additionally it helps to put your ssh public key into the (new)
file ``/home/cdedb2/.ssh/authorized_keys`` to suppress password queries.

.. _accessing-vm-windows:

Accessing -- Windows
--------------------

Das Ansprechen der VM ist unter Windows etwas komplizierter als unter Linux.
Im Folgenden werden die Arbeitsschritte einmal für VirtualBox durchgegangen.
Das Passwort für den Nutzer ``cdedb`` der VM ist ``akademie``.

* Web: Im VirtualBox Manager, bearbeite die VM

    * Netzwerkadapter / Adapter1: Angeschlossen an ``NAT``
    * Erweitert / Port-Weiterleitung: Neue Regel::

        Protokoll:TCP, Host-ID:127.0.0.1, Host-Port:20443, Gast-Port:223

  Jetzt lässt sich die VM unter https://localhost:20443/ im Browser ansprechen.

* ssh

    * VirtualBox Manager / Datei / Host-only Netzwerk-Manager / Erzeuge::

        NAME, IPv4:192.168.56.1/24, DHCP-Server:enable

    * Im VirtualBox Manager, bearbeite die VM / Netzwerkadapter / Adapter 2::

        Angeschlossen an:Hostonly-Adapter, Name:NAME

    * Starte die VM, melde dich an

        * ``id a`` sollte einen Eintrag ``enp0s8`` oder ähnlich zeigen, der leer ist::

            sudo nano /etc/network/interfaces

        * Am Ende der Datei hinzufügen::

            auto enp0s8
            iface enp0s8 inet static
            address 192.168.56.10
            netmask 255.255.255.0

  Jetzt sollte die VM über die CMD erreichbar sein::

    ssh.exe cdedb@192.168.56.10

* mounten: Dies ist nur für die aktive Entwicklung relevant, nicht für die Offline-VM.
  Hierfür gibt es keine Windows eigene Lösung. So funktionierts trotzdem

    * Führe die Schritte unter ``ssh`` aus.
    * Installiere https://github.com/billziss-gh/sshfs-win -- mindestens
      ``SSHFS-Win 3.5 BETA``
    * Navigiere zum Desktop im Explorer / Rechtsklick ``Dieser Pc`` / Netzlaufwerk verbinden... ::

        \\sshfs.r\cdedb@192.168.56.10\cdedb2

  Nun sollte die VM als Netzlaufwerk eingehängt worden sein.
