doc/source/Development_Environment_Setup_Docker.rst, before:

Setup a Docker container
========================

Here we describe how the Docker images provided inside the repository
may be used for development.

Prerequisites
-------------

To utilise the images you need to have Docker installed.
If you furthermore want to use the ``docker-compose.yaml`` file
(higly recommended) you also need ``docker-compose`` installed.
Theoretically the images and the compose file can also be run by podman
or similar OCI compatibel tools.
This however has not been tested yet.

The following commands assume that you are a member of the docker group
or have gained the proper permissions by other means like sudo.

Building the images
-------------------

Before starting any containers you have to build the corresponding images.
``docker-compose up`` will do this for you if they do not yet exist.
As the compose file is in a subdirectory you have to tell ``docker-compose``
where it has to look for it using the ``--file`` flag.
The flag needs to be places between ``docker-compose`` and the subcommand.
Another possibility is to simply change you working directory
to the parent directory of the compose file.
This applies to (almost) all subcommands.

Should you see the need to manually rebuild them you can do so using
``docker-compose build``.

Starting the containers
-----------------------

To start the containers you can simply run ``docker-copmpose up``.
This will let the containers run in the foreground and block your terminal.
If you wish to run the containers in a detached mode you can append a ``-d``.

Once the containers are running you can execute ``docker-compose ps``
to check if everything went well and all containers are still alive.
In this overview you are also able to see more information like port mappings.

To shutdown the containers you can either press CTRL+C
if you started the containers attached
or run ``docker-compose down`` otherwise.

Initializing the containers
---------------------------

Before you start using the containers you have to initialize a few things.
Most importantly this includes seeding the postgres database.
However if you have not run the ``i18n-compile`` and ``doc`` make targets yet,
you should also call them to ensure everything is available.
To do this you can run the following:

.. code-block:: console

    $ # navigate to the repository root
    $ make i18n-compile
    $ make doc
    $ cd related/docker
    $ docker-compose exec app make sample-data

.. warning::

    Currently is is advised to run make targets which generate files
    from the host to ensure proper permissions on the files.
    You may also experiment with executing them from within the containers
    when running as another user however this is somewhat complicated.
    Properly mapping the container user to the host user is a future TODO.


Using the containers
--------------------

Normally the compose file is configured to automatically mount your code
at the correct directory inside the application container.
If you wish to execute commands inside a running container you can either
pass them one-by-one to exec like above
or start an interactive session by executing bash inside a container
(``docker-compose exec app bash``).
To run commands in the postgres container
you have to subtitute ``app`` with ``cdb``.

The web interface is exposed at `localhost:8443 <https://localhost:8443>`_.
Additionally ``adminer``
--- a tool which can be used to inspect the database ---
can be reached using `localhost:8080 <http://localhost:8080>`_.

Some development commands like ``pylint`` are however not installed
inside the containers to keep them light and should be run locally.
For more information refer to the ``docker``/``docker-compose`` documentation
or execute ``docker-compose help``.


Resetting the containers
------------------------

The containers store their state in two volumes.
You can list these using ``docker volume ls``.
When starting the containers using ``docker-compose`` they get a proper name
which is generated from the name set in the ``docker-compose.yaml`` file
and the parent folder of that file.

The volumes used should therefore be named
``docker_database`` and ``docker_files``.
The former is attached to the postgres container and stores the database
while the latter stores uploaded attachments and similar files.

You can delete these volumes using ``docker volume rm VOLUME``.
This can however only be done when the containers are not running.
Execute ``docker-compose down`` to properly stop the containers.
To remove all volumes you can simply run ``docker-compose down --volumes``.

Commit message:

doc: Add note about ldap container initialization

doc/source/Development_Environment_Setup_Docker.rst, after:

Setup a Docker container
========================

Here we describe how the Docker images provided inside the repository
may be used for development.

Prerequisites
-------------

To utilise the images you need to have Docker installed.
If you furthermore want to use the ``docker-compose.yaml`` file
(higly recommended) you also need ``docker-compose`` installed.
Theoretically the images and the compose file can also be run by podman
or similar OCI compatibel tools.
This however has not been tested yet.

The following commands assume that you are a member of the docker group
or have gained the proper permissions by other means like sudo.

Building the images
-------------------

Before starting any containers you have to build the corresponding images.
``docker-compose up`` will do this for you if they do not yet exist.
As the compose file is in a subdirectory you have to tell ``docker-compose``
where it has to look for it using the ``--file`` flag.
The flag needs to be places between ``docker-compose`` and the subcommand.
Another possibility is to simply change you working directory
to the parent directory of the compose file.
This applies to (almost) all subcommands.

Should you see the need to manually rebuild them you can do so using
``docker-compose build``.

Starting the containers
-----------------------

To start the containers you can simply run ``docker-copmpose up``.
This will let the containers run in the foreground and block your terminal.
If you wish to run the containers in a detached mode you can append a ``-d``.
For the LDAP container to properly work you have to start it after seeding the database.
To do so you may use ``docker-compose up app`` and performing the steps
in the `Initializing the containers`_ section.
Afterwards you may start all containers using ``docker-compose up`.
Alternatively you can also comment out the LDAP container in the docker-compose file.

Once the containers are running you can execute ``docker-compose ps``
to check if everything went well and all containers are still alive.
In this overview you are also able to see more information like port mappings.

To shutdown the containers you can either press CTRL+C
if you started the containers attached
or run ``docker-compose down`` otherwise.

Initializing the containers
---------------------------

Before you start using the containers you have to initialize a few things.
Most importantly this includes seeding the postgres database.
However if you have not run the ``i18n-compile`` and ``doc`` make targets yet,
you should also call them to ensure everything is available.
To do this you can run the following:

.. code-block:: console

    $ # navigate to the repository root
    $ make i18n-compile
    $ make doc
    $ cd related/docker
    $ docker-compose exec app make sample-data

.. warning::

    Currently is is advised to run make targets which generate files
    from the host to ensure proper permissions on the files.
    You may also experiment with executing them from within the containers
    when running as another user however this is somewhat complicated.
    Properly mapping the container user to the host user is a future TODO.


Using the containers
--------------------

Normally the compose file is configured to automatically mount your code
at the correct directory inside the application container.
If you wish to execute commands inside a running container you can either
pass them one-by-one to exec like above
or start an interactive session by executing bash inside a container
(``docker-compose exec app bash``).
To run commands in the postgres container
you have to subtitute ``app`` with ``cdb``.

The web interface is exposed at `localhost:8443 <https://localhost:8443>`_.
Additionally ``adminer``
--- a tool which can be used to inspect the database ---
can be reached using `localhost:8080 <http://localhost:8080>`_.

Some development commands like ``pylint`` are however not installed
inside the containers to keep them light and should be run locally.
For more information refer to the ``docker``/``docker-compose`` documentation
or execute ``docker-compose help``.


Resetting the containers
------------------------

The containers store their state in two volumes.
You can list these using ``docker volume ls``.
When starting the containers using ``docker-compose`` they get a proper name
which is generated from the name set in the ``docker-compose.yaml`` file
and the parent folder of that file.

The volumes used should therefore be named
``docker_database`` and ``docker_files``.
The former is attached to the postgres container and stores the database
while the latter stores uploaded attachments and similar files.

You can delete these volumes using ``docker volume rm VOLUME``.
This can however only be done when the containers are not running.
Execute ``docker-compose down`` to properly stop the containers.
To remove all volumes you can simply run ``docker-compose down --volumes``.
